README:	WAIS Unix X UI release 8 b5.1.2			Thu Aug 27 1992
 Jonathan Goldman				 Thinking Machines Corp
------------------------------------------------------------------------

WARRANTY DISCLAIMER

This software was created by Thinking Machines Corporation and is
distributed free of charge.  It is placed in the public domain and
permission is granted to anyone to use, duplicate, modify and redistribute
it provided that this notice is attached.

Thinking Machines Corporation provides absolutely NO WARRANTY OF ANY KIND
with respect to this software.  The entire risk as to the quality and
performance of this software is with the user.  IN NO EVENT WILL THINKING
MACHINES CORPORATION BE LIABLE TO ANYONE FOR ANY DAMAGES ARISING OUT THE
USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, DAMAGES RESULTING FROM
LOST DATA OR LOST PROFITS, OR FOR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL
DAMAGES.

This release of the X WAIS Station provides two executables: xwais and
xwaisq.  The first, xwais, is a simple shell that "wraps around" xwaisq,
the real workhorse of the system.

To get an idea how to run use this application, look at the file XwaisHELP.

There are four critical resources the user can specify to change the
default directories the application uses.  They are the questionDirectory,
userSourceDirectory, commonSourceDirectory and documentDirectory resources.
This is where the application will attempt to find the initial questions
and sources, and where the application will store documents.  Set this
according to your personal directories.  It is also important that the
helpFile resources be set to the path where the X sources are.

The default values will probably work for most people.  The application
does know how to expand ~/ (so long as the environment variable HOME is
set), but does not know about other user directories.

Notes on building these applications:

This release attempts to build using an Imakefile.  If X is installed on
your machine, and you have write access to the X binary and
application-default directories, the X distribution should be easy to
build.  Use xmkmf to create a locally consistant Makefile, then type "make
install" to do it all.

**********************************************************************
A note on X release compatibility:  This software uses a feature of X11R5's
viewport widget not present in R4.  I tried to make it transparent to R4
users.
**********************************************************************

If this doesn't work, you can use my old example makefile, called
My-Makefile.  Use "make -f My-Makefile".  If it doesn't work "out of the
box" take a look at it for some pointers on how to actually build xwais and
xwaisq.  If your site does not use the "usual" directories for X
(/usr/include/X, /usr/lib/X11, or /usr/local/lib) you should modify the
CFLAGS and LFLAGS to point at the places your X distribution actaully uses.
You might have to find a system-administrator to assist you at installing
the application and its default resources (Xwais).

Take a look at the file Xwais to make sure the commonSourceDirectory and
helpfile resources are the correct pathnames for you site.  I've attempted
to do this automatically, but it may not always work.

Finally, I've included shell scripts in the bin directory of this
distribution that will set the XUSERFILESEARCHPATH to this directory, so
you need not install the app-defaults.  When you verify that everything is
set correctly, you may want to do `make install` to install the binaries
and app-defaults at your site.

A note about the viewers (Xwais.filters resource):  The default viewers
with this release require the pbm utilities (part of contrib in the MIT X11
release).
